In this video, we're going to discuss how row operations affect
determinants of matrices. So remember, we have three different kinds of row operations, so we'll talk
about each of the three of them in turn. So the first kind of row operation we have is
multiplying a row by a scalar. So, for example, we might
multiply the second row by five, which I'll denote five row
two goes to row two. And as we talked about in module
M. You can represent this with matrix multiplication by multiplying
by matrix where we've done the same operation to the identity.
So here we've multiplied row 2 by 5. So I've just multiplied
to the identity matrix by five. If I take any Matrix A
and multiply Q1 times A, that will multiply to the second row
of A by five. Now think about how this affects the determinant. We want to think
about what's going on geometrically here. So
we're thinking in terms of transforming. In this case, if we're talking about R^3,
the unit cube and our basis vectors are going to go to the columns of
the new matrix. So our first one is going to go to 1 0 0
right where it was before our second one. So I'm going to go to 0 5 0 all the
way over here. Third one's going to go to 0 1 0. So now if I
complete this to a parallelepiped but in this case, it's rectangular.
We get this kind of beautiful shape.
Now, if we look at what those lengths are, in the X direction, we were length one
in the Y direction, we were length five and in the Z direction we were length one. So our total
volume here is five. Therefore
the determinant of this Q1 matrix is five.
So in other words, if we apply this row operation to a matrix, we have
altered the determinant by a factor of five.
The second kind of row operation we had was swapping some rows. So, for example, maybe we'll swap
the second and third row of a matrix which I'll denote
like this. And if you want to write down the matrix, we multiply
by Q2 do this. Once again, we'll do the row operations to the identity
matrix. So we'll leave the first row, the identity matrix alone in the will swap the second and third rows.
But the third row in the second row and vise versa.
Once again, we want to think about what's happening geometrically.
I'm gonna use some different colors here to help us out. So our first column here, I'll do in
red. So our first basis vector 1 0 0. That stays at 1 0
0. Our second base is vector, which used to be zero one, zero
is now zero, zero one. So that's in the Z direction.
And finally, our third basis vector is now just going in the Y direction.
And so if we complete this. See that we get a cube
here. So our volume is going to be 1 times 1
times 1, which is still 1. However, the determinant
is not going to be 1. Remember, our determinant is actually a
signed volume, not just the volume, and what the sign is telling us is if we have a
left handed or right handed coordinate system. And in this case, what we've done is we've
actually changed the handedness of our coordinate system by swapping those two rows.
So here we have our basis vectors in order. So we had
red first and then blue and then green. So in a right handed coordinate system, if we do the
right hand rule on the red and the blue, we should end up with the positive green direction.
But here we see if we curl our fingers from the red to the blue with our right hand,
our thumb will be pointing off to the left, which is the negative green direction. So therefore, we've
changed our handedness here, so the determinant of Q2
is actually negative 1. And in general what will
happen hear is if you swap any pair of rows, that will alter the determinant by one negative
sign. So if you do a whole bunch of swaps, you just have to count as you do an even number or an odd number
to determine if the determinant is positive one or negative.
The last kind of cooperation we have was a kind of shearing operation.
So we might add a multiple of one row to another row. So here I've
written down, we're going to add two row twos to row three. So
with matrix multiplication, we would multiply on the left by the following matrix in a
row 1 in row two alone. We're going to add two row twos to row 3
here. Now I'll attempt
to draw this picture. It is not quite as
easy to draw as the other ones, but I'll do my best. So our first basis
vector still 1 0 0. Our second one is actually changing. In our third
one is the same. So our third one is going up here 0 0
1. And then our second basis vector is going
on in the Y direction and 2 in this direction, so we're going to.
Let's see, I drew that one incorrectly because that only went up 1 in the Y direction,
one in the Z direction, sorry. Let's try that again to go up.
To to direction.
All right. So now we'll complete this complete this over to a paralleliped
so we could go up one further out this way.
Down.
All right, so this picture is a little bit messy, but maybe what I'm seeing here is that in the XY plane we have a unit
square so that we can think about that as our our base and that unit squares can be from
the X and the Z here. And then we have another unit square over for the
top over here. So the the left side and the right side of our
figure are unit squares, which we can treat as our base.
And then we multiply that by the height. In this case, our height is going left to right. So
you have one for the area of our unit square. Height is that distance, one to the right.
So our volume here is just one. So our determinant of.
This matrix is one, and this is going to hold for any kind
of a shearing operation like this where you just taken a unit cube and sheared it. In this case, we sheared
it up a little bit in the Z direction.